Supplementary Appendix

This appendix has been provided by the authors to give readers additional information about their work.

Supplement to: Stone JH, Merkel PA, Spiera R, et al. Rituximab versus cyclophosphamide for ANCA-associated 
vasculitis. N Engl J Med 2010;363:221-32.

APPENDIX 

Methods and Data Supplement1 

This supplement contains additional information about the methods and data from the Rituximab 

in ANCA-Associated Vasculitis (RAVE) trial.  Specific components of this supplement include: 

1.  Detailed Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 

2.  Concomitant Medications 

3.  Glucocorticoid Use 

3.1.  The Glucocorticoid Taper 

3.2.  Glucocorticoid Use Prior to Baseline 

3.3.  Cumulative Glucocorticoid Use at Six Months 

4.  Interim Analysis 

5.  Inferiority Trial Design and Efficacy Analysis 

6.  Additional Results 

6.1.  Reasons for Primary Endpoint Failure in the Two Treatment Groups 

6.2.  Quality-of-Life 

6.3  Malignancies Beyond 6 Months 

1 All citations refer to references within the manuscript. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1.  Details of Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 

1.1.  Inclusion Criteria: 

•  Diagnosis of WG or MPA according to the Chapel Hill Consensus Conference 

definitions1 

•  Positive serum assay for PR3-ANCA or MPO-ANCA 

•  Newly-diagnosed at the time of screening or presenting with a severe disease flare 

•  Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Scores for WG (BVAS/WG) of 3 or more 

•  Severe disease; i.e., one or more major BVAS/WG items or be severe enough to require 

treatment with cyclophosphamide to induce remission24.  Under the current standard of 

care, all subjects would have been considered for treatment with cyclophosphamide and 

glucocorticoids because of severe disease manifestations. 

1.2.  Exclusion Criteria: 

•  Churg-Strauss syndrome or anti-glomerular basement membrane disease 

•  Patients with limited disease activity not normally treated with cyclophosphamide  

•  Alveolar hemorrhage severe enough to require mechanical ventilation 

•  Serum creatinine level greater than 4.0 mg/dl attributed to renal failure from the current 

episode of renal disease activity 

•  White blood cell count less than 4000/mm3 or platelet counts less than 120,000/mm3  

2 

•  Serum hepatic transaminase levels greater than 2.5 times the upper limit of normal 

•  Known allergy to monoclonal antibodies or murine proteins 

•  Active systemic infection at time of screening 

•  History of deep space infection such as osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, or pneumonia 

complicated by empyema 

•  History of infection with hepatitis B or C or human immunodeficiency virus 

•  Acute or chronic liver disease severe enough to preclude the ability to participate in the 

trial. 

•  Malignancy: Active or history of malignancy in the last 5 years.  (Individuals with 

squamous cell or basal cell skin carcinomas and individuals with cervical carcinoma in 

situ may be enrolled if they have received curative surgical treatment). 

•  Receipt of a live vaccine fewer than 4 weeks before potential randomization. 

•  Receipt of oral or intravenous cyclophosphamide within 4 months prior to enrollment 

•  Receipt of glucocorticoids for longer than 14 days before screening 

•  History of adverse effects from standard therapy (i.e., bone-marrow hypoplasia, 

cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis or malignancy) 

•  Previous therapy with rituximab or alemtuzumab 

•  Treatment with plasma exchange within the 3 months preceding the screening visit   

3 

 
2.  Concomitant Medications   

All patients received Pneumocystis and osteoporosis prophylaxis for the duration of the trial.  

The use of any immunosuppressive medication not included in the protocol was prohibited.  

3.  Glucocorticoid Use 

3.1.  The glucocorticoid taper  

The use of glucocorticoids followed a strict protocol.  Patients received 1-3 (1000 mg) pulses of 

methylprednisolone at enrollment, followed by prednisone 1 mg/kg/day (maximum 80 mg/day).  

The dose was tapered such that by month 5 all patients who achieved remission without flaring 

had completely discontinued glucocorticoids.  The prednisone dose was reduced to 40 mg/day no 

later than by the completion of week 4 and maintained for two weeks.  Stepwise dose reductions 

then continued every two weeks: 30 mg, 20 mg, 15 mg, 10 mg, 7.5 mg, 5 mg, 2.5 mg, and 0 

mg/day.  Within these parameters, the protocol allowed for investigator discretion about the oral 

prednisone dose between randomization and completion of week 4.  

4 

 
The protocol for the administration of glucocorticoids resulted in the maximal allowed and 

minimal required total doses of prednisone per protocol as indicated in Supplemental Figure 1. 

Glucocorticoid Use during the Remission Induction Phase of the RAVE Trial.   
The gray shaded area outlines the maximal allowed and minimally required prednisone dose 
per protocol.  The box plots for each treatment group show the medians, upper and lower 
quartiles, and minimal and maximal doses (whiskers) given to patients who remained in the 
originally assigned treatment group through month 6.  This includes patients who were 
treated for limited disease flares according to protocol with increases of the prednisone 
dose.  Not included are patients who fulfilled criteria for early treatment failure, suffered a 
severe flare and were treated with cross-over therapy, or those who were discontinued from 
the planned protocol for any other reason.   

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.  Glucocorticoid Use Prior to Baseline 

Several factors could have influenced the glucocorticoid use prior to the first infusion.  The time 

intervals between referral to the site, screening, randomization or first infusion were variable.  

Patients who had received glucocorticoids for longer than 14 days prior to consent were excluded 

(see exclusion criteria).  However, glucocorticoids given by referring physicians prior to the 

screening visit were not under the control of investigators and not governed by the protocol.  The 

time between consent (screening) and first infusion (randomization) could be as long as 2 weeks 

or as short as 1 day.  Because glucocorticoid use within days prior to implementation of the 

protocol could have affected outcomes, and particularly the number of early treatment failures, 

we tabulated and analyzed all glucocorticoid use within 14 days prior to consent and 

randomization.  As shown in the manuscript’s Table 1, no differences in the two groups were 

observed in the total dosage of glucocorticoids administered within 14 days prior to consent and 

first infusion.   

3.3.  Cumulative Glucocorticoid Use at Six Months 

The mean (± SD) methylprednisolone doses were not different: 2165 mg (1694 mg) for the 

rituximab arm versus 2389 mg (3833) mg for the cyclophosphamide arm (p=0.988).  However, 

the mean cumulative dosages of prednisone were different: 3595 mg (999 mg) and 3977 mg 

(1183 mg) for the rituximab and cyclophosphamide groups, respectively (p=0.025).  These 

results include glucocorticoid usage for limited and severe disease flares that occurred during the 

remission induction period (6 months), as well as all glucocorticoids given between 14 days prior 

to consent and first infusion (randomization).  However, analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) 

showed that the post-randomization use was conditional on the pre-randomization glucocorticoid 

6 

use.  This means that the difference in cumulative glucocorticoid use cannot be clearly attributed 

to treatment differences. 

The Supplement Figure 1 shows the medians of the oral prednisone doses given to patients who 

remained in their originally assigned treatment group throughout the remission induction period 

including those receiving prednisone for treatment of a limited flare according to protocol.    

4.  Interim analysis 

One planned interim analysis for futility was performed when 100 participants had completed 6 

months of follow-up.  We used a Lan-DeMets alpha spending function with an O’Brien-Fleming 

boundary, allocating 0.003 alpha to the interim analysis and 0.049 alpha to the final analysis.  

The trial was not stopped because the remission rate in the experimental arm was not 

significantly less than that in the control arm. 

5.  Inferiority trial design and efficacy analysis  

This trial was designed to test whether treatment with the investigational regimen was not 

inferior to treatment with conventional therapy for the induction of complete remission.  

Complete remission was indicated by the BVAS/WG of 0 and successful prednisone taper by 6 

months after randomization (primary endpoint).  Analysis of non-inferiority relied on estimating 

the difference in the percentage of participants who attained complete remission in the two 

treatment arms.  The difference in the percentage of participants who attained complete 

remission in the rituximab arm and the control arm was analyzed using a two-sided 95% 

7 

 
 
confidence interval and a t-distribution multiplier.  The lower bound of this confidence interval 

around the difference in proportions was used to assess non-inferiority and superiority.   If the 

lower bound was below  −20%, non-inferiority would have been rejected.   

To conclude non-inferiority two conditions had to be met.  First, the lower bound of the 95% 

confidence interval on the difference had to be above −20%.  Second, if the point estimate for the 

complete remission rate in the rituximab arm was lower than that of the cyclophosphamide arm, 

the point estimate for the cyclophosphamide arm complete remission rate had to be at least 40% 

to meet the claim of non-inferiority for rituximab (assurance that the control was effective).   

To conclude superiority  the lower bound of the difference in complete remission rate at 6 

months of the rituximab versus the cyclophosphamide treatment arms had to be  above 0%, and 

the lower bound of the two-sided 95% confidence interval of the complete remission rate at 6 

months in the rituximab arm had to be greater than or equal to 50%.  Because the evaluation of 

non-inferiority and superiority was based on the same analysis, no multiplicity adjustment was 

made. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplemental Figure 2 shows the trial results for both treatment arms and how they relate to 

these protocol-defined non-inferiority and superiority requirements.   

Supplemental Figure 2.  Shown are the remission rates and 95% confidence intervals 
within the rituximab treated and control groups for remission (BVAS/WG=0) on 0 
mg/day and < 10 mg/day of prednisone (the primary and principal secondary efficacy 
endpoints) with reference lines at 50% for superiority in the treated group and 40% for 
non-inferiority in the control group.  The lower bounds of the confidence intervals in the 
control group were completely above 40% and the overall test for non-inferiority was 
significant, meaning that both criteria for non-inferiority of rituximab treatment compared 
to control were achieved.  Even though the lower bounds of both confidence intervals in 
the rituximab group were above 50%, superiority was not achieved because the lower 
bound of the confidence interval on the difference to control was not above 0.  

Non-inferiority was concluded for the primary endpoint and the secondary endpoint of remission 

on less than 10 mg of prednisone at 6 months, because the lower bound of the 95% confidence 

interval on the difference was above -20% (see Figure 2 in the paper).  Since the point estimate 

of the remission rate for the rituximab arm was higher than that of the cyclophosphamide arm, 

the second requirement for the non-inferiority conclusion had no bearing even though it was also 

fulfilled (the point estimate of the remission rate of cyclophosphamide arm was 53.1% and the 

lower bound of its 95% confidence interval was above 40%). 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Superiority was rejected because the lower bound of the two-sided 95% confidence intervals on 

the difference was below 0%.  Since the first condition for superiority was not met, the second 

condition was irrelevant even though it was fulfilled  (the point estimate of the remission rate of 

cyclophosphamide arm was 63.3% and the lower bound of its 95% confidence interval was 

above 50%). 

6.  Additional Results 

6.1.  Reasons for Primary Endpoint Failure in the Two Treatment Groups 

The Supplemental Table 1 indicates the reasons why some patients in the two treatment arms 

did not achieve the primary endpoint, disease remission (BVAS/WG = 0) at six months and 

successful completion of the glucocorticoid taper. 

Supplemental Table 1.  Reasons for Primary Endpoint Failure in the Two Treatment 
Groups 

Reason for  
Primary Endpoint Failure 

Rituximab 
(n=36) 
7 

Cyclophosphamide 
(n=46) 
2 

Total 

9 

52 
48 

33 
25 

19 
23 

“Early Treatment Failure” as 
defined per protocol 
BVAS/WG not zero at month 6 
Failed to complete prednisone 
taper 
Experienced disease flare 
Died from AAV or treatment 
Discontinued from trial because 
of adverse effects  
Blinded crossover 
Treated according to best 
medical judgment 
Imputed to be treatment failures 
because 6-month data not 
available 
*Two of the three deaths that occurred before 6 months are listed in this Table.  The other death occurred after the patient had 
met other treatment failure and study termination criteria.  Only safety data were collected on this patient at the time of death. 

24 
1 
10 

17 
1 
4 

41 
2* 
14 

13 
13 

6 
7 

7 
6 

1 

4 

5 

10 

 
 
 
6.2.  Quality-of-Life   

Quality-of-life scores improved in both groups.  In the rituximab group, SF-36 physical and 

mental health component summary scores (range 0-100) improved by 5.9 (SD=10.4) and 7.9 

(12.6) points, respectively.  These same summary scores improved by 6.0 (10.4) and 5.3 (12.9) 

points in the cyclophosphamide group.  There was no significant difference between treatment 

groups in the change from baseline to month 6 in the quality-of-life scores or their rate of change 

over this period.  

6.3.  Malignancies Beyond Six Months 

This trial was monitored rigorously by the sponsor (NIAID) and adverse events were reviewed 

carefully by the Data Safety Monitoring Board.  As reported in the manuscript, one malignancy 

occurred in the rituximab group and one in the cyclophosphamide group during the first six 

month.  Both of these were adenocarcinomas of the prostate.   

Since the six-month time point, four patients randomized to rituximab and one patient 

randomized to cyclophosphamide have developed cancers.  One patient in the rituximab group 

developed two cancers.  This prompted a careful review of the malignancies that occurred in the 

trial to date.  This analysis is summarized here. 

11 

 
 
 
 
The specific malignancies reported to date include prostate cancer (2), colon cancer (2), uterine 

cancer (1), lung cancer (1), bladder cancer (1), and papillary thyroid cancer (1).  These cancers 

do not suggest any particular pattern to the types of malignancies observed. 

Thus, the total cancers in follow-up to date are six total malignancies in five patients originally 

assigned to the rituximab arm, and two malignancies in two patients originally assigned to the 

cyclophosphamide arm. 

Because of the trial design, patients have an increasing likelihood of being exposed to rituximab 

as follow-up continues.  The protocol mandates blinded crossover treatment of severe flares that 

occur before 6 months and open-label rituximab treatment of all severe flares occurring between 

6 months and 18.  The protocol also allows treatment on an open-label basis with rituximab 

according to best medical judgment after a patient has been followed for 18 months, up until the 

common close-out date.  One of the patients originally randomized to cyclophosphamide who 

developed a malignancy was also treated with rituximab later in the trial.  When the data are 

analyzed “as treated” for rituximab, 6 of 124 (4.8%) of patients having received rituximab versus 

1 of 73 (1.4%) of patients who never received rituximab developed one malignancy (p=0.26).  

As described in detail below, 5 of the 6 rituximab-treated patients also received other 

immunosuppressive agents either during or before the trial that might have contributed to their 

malignancy development.  The malignancy in the sixth rituximab-treated patient (who did not 

receive other agents) was an adenocarcinoma of the prostate.   

12 

 
 
More than half of the trial participants received immunosuppressive agents (cyclophosphamide, 

azathioprine, methotrexate) that are associated with increased risks of cancer before enrollment 

in this trial.  We therefore analyzed the exposure to cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, and 

methotrexate among the patients who developed cancer during the trial.       

Supplemental Table 2 (below) shows the cancer patients’ histories of exposure to these other 

medications before their diagnoses of cancer.  The Table includes data related to the occurrence 

of 8 solid malignancies in seven patients.  Please note that because of the importance of 

preserving the trial blind in the setting of ongoing patient follow-up, demographic data that 

might identify patients to investigators (e.g., age and sex) are not provided.  

Supplemental Table 2 includes data on both exposure to the medications before trial entry (the 

upper part of each row) and after trial entry (lower part of each row).  As an example, the first 

patient, diagnosed with papillary thyroid cancer, was exposed to a year-long cyclophosphamide 

course and a month-long methotrexate regimen before enrollment in this trial.  During the trial, 

this patient was exposed to cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, and rituximab starting 798, 698, and 

306 days, respectively, before his or her cancer diagnosis.       

13 

 
 
 
 
Supplemental Table 2.  Type of Malignancy, Pre-enrollment vasculitis treatments, and Pre-
Malignancy-Diagnosis Exposure to Four Medications. 

Type of Cancer  Medications 
the patient 
received 
before cancer 
diagnosis 

Papillary thyroid 
cancer 

RTX, CYC, 
AZA, MTX 

Uterine cancer 

RTX, MTX 

Prostate cancer 

RTX 

Colon cancer 
metastatic 

RTX, CYC, 
MTX 

Prostate cancer 

CYC 

Bladder cancer# 

RTX, MTX 

Adenocarcinoma 
of the colon# 

RTX, MTX 

Lung neoplasm 
malignant 

RTX, CYC 

Medication Exposure Summary 

RTX* 

CYC* 

AZA* 

MTX* 

306 days 

909 days 

71 days 

454 days 

811 days 

1180 days 

30 mg max; 
30 days 

25 mg. 
max; 
3102 days 

25 mg. 
max; 
1590 days 

25 mg. 
max; 
1600 days 

25 mg. 
max; 
1600 days 

150 mg. 
max; 
365 days 
798 days  698 days 

150 mg. 
max; 
240 days 

53 days 

100 mg. 
max; 
10 days 

532 days 
*RTX = rituximab, CYC = cyclophosphamide, AZA = azathioprine, MTX = methotrexate 
#These two malignancies occurred in the same patient. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplemental Table 2 demonstrates that all patients who developed malignancies in this trial 

had histories of exposure to at least two (and in most cases more) medications known to increase 

the risk of cancer.  Only two patients had received just one of these medications (RTX, CYC, 

MTX, or AZA) before their cancer diagnosis in the trial.  In both such cases, the cancer diagnosis 

was adenocarcinoma of the prostate.     

Supplemental Table 3 shows the malignancy rates according to the exposure to RTX, CYC, 

AZA, and MTX.     

Supplemental Table 3.  Malignancy rates according to exposure to RTX, CYC, AZA, and 

MTX. 

Actual Result 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Malignancies (person-
years) in exposed to a 
particular drug 

Malignancies (person-
years) in unexposed to 
that drug 

Incidence Rate 
Ratio 

p-value (H0: 
IRR=1) 

RTX 

CYC 

AZA 

MTX 

6 (211.7) 

4 (270.7) 

2 (180.0) 

4 

1 (152.2) 

3 (93.1) 

5 (182.4) 

3 

4.31 

0.46 

0.41 

0.140 

0.295 

0.264 

0.127* 

*based on simple chi-square, not incidence-rate ratios 

Columns 2 and 3 show the count of malignancies observed in each of two exposure groups along 

with the person-years of time of exposure to a particular medication during the trial.  In Column 

2, for example, 6 patients who had been exposed to rituximab experienced malignancies over 

15 

  
 
 
 
 
211.7 person-years of exposure.  By contrast, only 1 patient never exposed to rituximab 

experienced a malignancy, over a period of 152.2 person-years of follow-up. 

Column 4 shows the ratio of the incidence rates in the patients exposed and unexposed to a 

particular drug.  As the first row shows, those exposed to rituximab had a 4.3 times higher 

incidence rate of malignancies than those not exposed.  This was not statistically significant 

(p=0.140).  Moreover, as shown in Supplemental Table 2, most of the RTX-treated patients 

who developed cancer also had histories of treatment with one or more medications known to be 

associated with an increased risk of cancer.   

Column 5 shows statistical significance testing related to the question of whether the two 

incidence rates shown in columns 2 and 3 were equal.  The null hypothesis tested was that the 

incidence rates in columns 2 and 3 were equal, i.e., had a ratio of 1.  The p-values shown in 

column 5 indicate that there was not sufficient evidence of differing incidence rates to support 

rejection of the null hypothesis for any of the medications to which patients were exposed, either 

before or during the study.   

In conclusion, the number of patients who have developed malignancies is small: n=8; 6 in one 

group, 2 in the other.  The attribution to any single drug of “cause” for these cancers, which are 

common in the general population, is confounded by the fact that most patients have been 

exposed to multiple drugs known to be associated with an increased risk of cancer.   

16 

   
 
 
